Overview
###################

The Consortium
**********************
The Specify Collections Consortium (SCC) is an international, non-profit, membership
organization of biological museums, universities and government agencies working
together to advance computerization within biodiversity research collections. The SCC
does this by providing open-source software platforms and technical services for
specimen data digitization and collection management.

As of November 2024, the Specify Collections Consortium comprises 142-member
institutions from 24 countries that collectively use Specify software in 451 research
collections. (The SCC member list is available on our web site,
http://www.specifysoftware.org/members.) The Consortium is financially and legally
administered as a U.S. 501(c)3 non-profit organization under the Office of Research of
the University of Kansas, a U.S. public research university. Prior to 2018, the Specify
initiative was funded by grants for 20+ years by the U.S. National Science Foundation.
Reaching back to its roots in 1987, the Consortium represents 36 years of biodiversity
collection community engagement with collections software and technical support.

The Consortium’s financial health has been strong since we transformed the Specify
initiative to an institution membership organization in 2018. Membership has grown an
average of 14% per year; in 2024 the SCC’s membership revenue will reach $486,000 USD.
The University of Kansas provides additional salary support to the Consortium in the
amount of $186,000 per year. Supplemental revenue comes from grants. In 2024, with
$192,000 in grant funding from the Swiss Academy of Sciences SwissCollNet Program,
and in collaboration with several Swiss museums of natural history, we are extending
Specify to the geosciences for managing research collections of rocks, minerals, gems,
and meteorites.  The extension will be available as of the first quarter of 2025.

Expertise and Services
**********************
The SCC office, acting as home base for its software engineers and support staff, is
located in the Biodiversity Institute at the University of Kansas in Lawrence Kansas.
Staff includes the Director (Dr. J.H. Beach), three professional software engineers,
two professional technical support staff, four junior undergraduate software engineers,
and three undergraduate software quality testers.

With member fulfillment and technical services, the SCC provides timely responses to
help desk requests. We also operate a Specify Community Forum site that serves as a hub
for Specify member feedback and discussion (http://discourse.specifysoftware.org). In
addition to producing new capabilities in regular Specify software releases and fixing
bugs in minor updates, we also work with SCC member collections to migrate historical
data sets and to resolve technical or data issues that arise. We have a deep technical
understanding of the research and curatorial goals of collections scientists and of the
data management tasks that are part of museum operations. Our professional software
engineering and support staff have decades of experience working with collections of
all biological disciplines, sample preparation types and collection work protocols.

Why use Specify Software?
-------------------------
We understand biological collections and their data, A-to-Z and top-to-bottom. No team
on the planet has worked with more collections’ data or converted more legacy database
systems to a modern relational database design than we have. The SCC was born in the
biological collections community, and we have been embedded and fully-engaged with
research collections for decades.

Since the mid-1990s our approach to the semantics, structure, and logical processing of
biological collections data has met the needs of hundreds of collections curators and
researchers, worldwide. One ingredient for our long-term success, and ongoing utility of
Specify for biological collections, lies in the design of Specify’s layered software
architecture. Specify has a highly-adaptable, collection-centric design that allows
interface forms, components, languages, and even embedded help tips to be customized
for each collection. By using configuration preferences and settings, Specify’s data
forms can be optimized around a collection’s standard protocols without modifying
Specify’s codebase or database design.

Our flagship software platform, Specify 7, combines the interface design components and
data management foundation we supported for over 15 years in Specify 6, our Java
thick-client platform, with the efficiency and ease-of-use of web-based data access and
cloud computing. The Specify 7 web application uses the same data forms layout language
as Specify 6, so user interface customizations made in one platform are mirrored in the
other. Also because Specify 6 and Specify 7 use the same database schema in a MySQL or
MariaDB database, they can be run simultaneously within a biological collection. By
providing a clear migration path to the web, Specify 7 has helped transition Specify 6
collections to cloud computing. Specify 7 is also a great starting platform for
institutions that prefer to avoid managing server hardware or workstation software
installation, with the added benefit of ubiquitous web browser access. Specify 7 server
software is supported on generic Linux servers, which provides an option to consider a
cloud hosted deployment to handle server administration, security management, and data
backup. Institutions can use their own hosting provider or the SCC’s Specify Cloud
service (https://www.specifysoftware.org/products/cloud/) to host their collection
databases.

Moving forward
**********************
The Specify team is constantly working on enhancing the user experience by revising
code and adding new features. The 2025 Work Program for development and outreach can be
found on our Forum (https://discourse.specifysoftware.org/t/2025-scc-work-program/2273).
Development priorities are established through feedback and discussion with our Board
of Members, User Advisory Committee, and Technology Advisory Committee, as well as our
interactions with our members via email, meetings, and our member Forum.

Working with New Members
**************************
Specify staff includes an Implementation Officer and Technical Support Officer who will
take the lead in analyzing data and workflow requirements, as well as work with customer
staff to discuss implementation options to decide on a path forward as well as a
timeline for the decided path.  The discussions may involve weekly or monthly meetings
between us and the customers, site visits potentially on both sides, and training on
Specify software.

We have a long history of working with organizations to onboard them into Specify
software.  We have worked with collections of all sizes from a few hundred specimens
to around a billion (Canadian Department of Fisheries and Oceans), just about every
natural history discipline, different collection types (preserved specimen, lots,
DNA/tissue, etc.), different complexities from a single collection to consortia with
dozens of institutions each with multiple disciplines.

We have also worked with several consortia of institutions with natural history and
geology collections to bring their data into Specify, including the Denmark Consortia
of Natural History Collections, the South African National Biodiversity Institute
(SANBI), Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), and the
Canadian Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO). We are also currently working with a
Greek Consortia of Natural History Collections to obtain a grant to bring their
institutions’ data into Specify. We can not only leverage that experience in our
discussions and plans, we have a close relationship with representatives from those
consortia who we can reference or meet with to come to the most effective plan for
Norway’s data migration.

We have completed or are currently working with the above Consortia to plan how they
structured their data, each defining optimal work protocols and methods according to
their workflow, institutional independence, and support level. Decisions on how they
structured collection data in their institutional network had downstream effects on
how their information was imported and standardized, all of which we mapped out for
them and assisted, including followup visits and constant interactions.  All of the
consortia we’ve worked with are also on our Board of Members, so they are active
participants in deciding the future of our development and of the SCC as a whole.
